Paper: Session Types for Inter-Process Communication
Authors: Simon J. Gay, Vasco Vasconcelos, and António Ravara
Review (18/9/2014):

Describes a programming language based on the lambda calculus with I/O side
effects. The system tracks changes in the types of the channels and aliasing.
Types of functions also describe how they affect channels.

A progressively more elaborate maths server is described. An interesting note
is that the simple server which computes the sum of two integers does not
capture this fact in the type of the session. A *dependently* typed session
could however, instead of:
      S = ?Int.?Int.!Int.End
we could have
      S = ?(n: Int).?(m: Int).!(n+m).End
the type of the sent object is inferred from the addition operation. Or even
better (perhaps),
      S = ?(n: Int).?(m: Int).!(p: Int).!(p = m+n).End
we send a *proof* that p is the sum of the two received integers. The proof is
constructed on the server side and so the only way to satisfy the protocol
on the server side is to send the sum of the two inputs.

A function type is specific to a particular channel; I'm not sure how the
binding works in this case. Apparently, the function type doesn't truly
abstract over channels. I think what is meant by this is that the channel
type is specified in the function definition.

Type of variables referring to channels is recorded separately to the channel
state (current session type). This ensures that aliases are handled correctly.

Syntax of small lambda calculus with novel environments for channels and
modified reduction semantics; channel identifiers only visible through
reduction not term-level syntax. The channel environment monitor the changing
session type of channels but is statically determined requiring no runtime
checks. The pair of a channel environment and a term is known as a
configuration, and the channel environment can be seen as the stateful
computation maintained throughout. Would it be possible to thread it through
the program like a monad? Rather than have a ``non-standard'' typing
judgement? Using channel environments is stated to be only necessary because
only one side of the communication protocol is considered.

The typing of a function application highlights the previously mentioned
limitation of the channel environments approach; its required that the
argument and function typing contain identical channel environments including
the names of the channels, rather than being allowed to identify environments
up to alpha-equivalence. We would somehow like to generalise the function type
over channel identifiers. The type of functions encodes aliasing since the
channel identifier is used in types assigned to variables. Thus, any variable
which aliases that channel will have the same type as all other aliases. This
is the reason for typing functions with explicit channel identifiers.

Branching constructs must have the same effect on channel environments across
all branches.

A number of term abbreviations are defined and some derivations from the
typing rules are shown.

Type system includes a proof of subject reduction i.e. that if a well-typed
term can reduce then the result is also well-typed (preservation?). We also
have a theorem stating that all well-typed programs do not contain faulty
configurations i.e. a pair of a channel environment and a term such that the
term is not a value yet there it cannot be reduced any further.

Separating the creation (via new) and the naming required a separate
environment to record the current session type of a channel. Variables within
the type environment referenced this type indirectly using the identifier for
the channel. Recursion was needed to support the recursive session types.

